How did three software engineers alone
Power One of the fastest rising
apps of all time in an area
where billions flood startups
to hire armies of software engineers.
had it? Only three achieve
this incredible feat?
In today's video, we'll talk about
how Instagram was able to scale
to 14 million users
with only three software engineers.
Welcome back to the channel.
If you're new here, then my name is Lewis
and I'm on a mission to inspire developers
and tech enthusiasts.
After raising $500,000
to develop an app called Bourbon.
Instagram decided that their app
was to similar to Foursquare
and decided to reinvent itself
with a focus on photo sharing.
So they stripped away
a ton of its original features.
Eight weeks later, they gave it to friends
to beta test and fix any bugs after.
It was almost time to launch Instagram
was released to the iOS App Store on
October six, 2010, and only within hours
the app reached over 25,000 users,
then 100,000 after the first week
and then over 1,000,003 months later.
The timing behind Instagram was perfect.
It was when the iPhone four
was just released to the public,
and the iPhone four had a camera
that was showing the power behind
a cell phone camera.
The explosion in growth was incredible.
Growing to 1 million users and months
and it's a good problem to have.
But that $500,000 was slowly
being eaten up.
So another $25 million was raised
by the founders to help expand their team.
world is looking at Instagram
and to address the rapidly growing users.
They hired more people,
but not a lot of people.
A small group of software engineers
were hired to help with the development,
but their first job
put out the constant fires.
So with three engineers tasked to scale
this application to 14 million users
effectively, they needed to put down
some important principles.
Keep it very simple.
Don't reinvent the wheel.
Go with proven and solid technology.
And after months and months of work,
this is what they put together.
Developers are
always in critical danger if
vulnerabilities in their app are missed.
And thanks again to our sponsor Sneak.
Keeping your source code
secure and up to date is extremely easy.
Eyes like GitHub copilot and chatty
beta are helping programmers
code a lot faster,
but over 53% of programmers say that A.I.
has introduced
vulnerabilities into their code.
So how do we prevent this from happening?
Thanks to sneak code
that is powered by deep code A.I..
You can detect vulnerabilities
in real time through an integration
of your favorite code editor and fix
right after you paste in the code.
This includes the packages that you
install as well as sneak intelligently,
analyzes your configuration files,
dependencies, and your Docker containers.
So when I generate some code
to write a user to the database,
Nic is able to tell me right away
that something isn't adding up.
This way you can get the benefits of A.I.
generating code for you while
also keeping your code up to date
with security standards
with sneaks generous free forever plan.
You can feel more confident writing code
that's written by you or your A.I.
buddy.
I've been using sneak personally
for a very long time,
and it's an absolute privilege for them
to be a long term sponsor of this channel.
Sign up for Sneak for absolutely free
with the link in the description
below and start actually
having confidence in your deployments.
Load balancer.
now, as soon as you open the application,
Instagram pings their servers in order
to bring you relevant information.
But where does it know
to go to get that relevant information?
This is where load balancers come in.
Instagram engineers use Amazon's
elastic load balancer to do this.
Load balancing is a common concept
in computer infrastructure.
If you had one server to handle
all of this,
you would have to upgrade
to more powerful machines constantly.
Instead, if you horizontally scale,
it means you can take different sizes
of computers and distribute
the traffic accordingly.
So the load balancer decides
where the traffic goes.
In this instance.
The engineers use three engine
X instances that can be swapped in and out
at any point.
the amount of traffic coming in at
the spot is massive and these servers
then had to decide what server
to distribute it to those servers being
the application server.
Think about the main code
that the Instagram backend sets on.
It's on one of these servers.
Oh yeah. So
it's not just one of these servers.
It's 25 of them.
Each of these machines
are designed to handle high CPU usage
and on each of them have the Django
framework installed on them.
Django is an open source web framework
that is built on top of Python
that lets you migrate databases,
set specific routes for your information
and deal with authentication.
Django is extremely popular
in the Python community
and so many big websites
are still using it to this day.
So once the load balancer directs
the traffic to one of these 25 servers,
that traffic hits what is called
G unicorn gun, a corn dog unicorn.
Does anyone actually know
what the answer to this is?
This is a W SGI server
which acts like a bridge
between the actual Python code
and the load balancer.
In this instance.
But this presents another issue.
How do we make sure that all 25 machines
have the exact same code on them?
And how do we make sure
we can control all 25?
The engineers use something called fabric
that lets them execute
the same command across all machines.
These machines are stateless, meaning
that it doesn't store any information
on that machine specifically.
So your request is treated
the same amongst all machines.
But if they're not being stored on the
machine, then where are they being stored?
Data storage.
one of the most important.
If not the most important part
of any software company is its data.
base data like user photo
metadata tags and more.
Live inside of a PostgreSQL database.
But it can just be one database.
It was 12 extra large
memory databases, each
with a replica helping it.
But what database do we even use then?
They needed a quick way
to quickly match metadata
with a correct database to store data.
For this issue, they needed a system
that could easily store and remove data
at lightning speeds.
So for this, they used Redis
Redis as a data structure store
that uses their memory
to read and write extremely fast.
Writing to a desk
takes longer than writing to memory.
And so for operations
that require you to execute things
like lightning fast,
like a web server, it's extremely needed.
The Reds cache was stored in the media
ID that is with the user
ID so that the database knew
which database to go to.
this, knocking off
even more potential latency.
But now it's on to the database.
Here's an issue, though.
Databases,
especially PostgreSQL, has a really,
really heavy architecture
when it comes to handling connections.
Every time a new connection starts,
it creates a new process, performs
the operation,
and then closes this connection,
which is great for long live connections.
But what happens when your users
are coming in
at the billions
and very quickly to solve this?
Something goes in between the database
and the server.
A connection pooler rather than making
a new connection on the spot.
The pooler creates a set amount
of existing connections.
Once something connects the pool or gives
the existing connection to the request
coming in
and puts it back when it's finished
and when the database comes back
with the data, it's then put into a cache
powered by six instances of mem cached.
Imagine going on Instagram
and clicking the profile of someone
making a call to a database over
the same information
is extremely inefficient
and causes things to slow down.
So instead we can store
frequently made requests in a cache,
and when someone requests it,
we can take it to our extremely fast
memory store and try to keep
all this pressure off of the database
is such a core and pivotal aspect
to any computer infrastructure.
So this is where we're storing tags.
But like this is Instagram here.
What about the images?
Object Storage.
One of the most convenient ways
to store files services like Amazon S3 let
you upload terabytes worth of objects
in a file structure of your choosing.
rather than just sending the object
directly through the servers,
it does something different.
When the request hits
the application servers, it goes to S3
and generates a signed URL
that is only temporary.
It then sends this back to your phone
so that the file can upload directly
to the cloud servers
instead of Instagram's.
The metadata info and the
your realm of where this image is located
is then saved in the database.
So once all the queries are made
and the data is ready to be sent
back to the user,
we have to find a way to send it to them
before we send it back to the user.
We have to swap the URL from the object
storage to something called a CD
and a content delivery network
is exactly what it sounds.
there are.
Servers all around
the world are able to deliver files closer
to your users, similar to our mem cache,
when a user requests a brand new file
from the CD and it takes a little longer
to grab this file from the origin point
on just the first time.
this is then cached
and this CD and edge point
and can consistently be delivered
to people in the closest area.
So the object storage link
is then translated over to the CD end link
and then sent back to the user.
This is when your feed starts
to populate the data renders on the screen
and then the photo starts
A download to your device and all of that
just for you to
exit Instagram immediately.
Wait.
If my
app was closed, how did this send to me?
The Apple Push Notification Service,
a service provided by Apple
to let companies send payloads to them
that will then be sent to the users.
But like with over 90 likes happening
per second,
how do they do that scale?
another server
that has the open source software Pie
API and as dedicated
for the task of sending out
push notifications as fast as possible.
So as soon as a like happens,
a trigger is made to make
a push notification in using the user ID,
but like how can we scale to 90 likes per
second task cuz a common
software infrastructure practice
to set and forget large processes.
And in this case the three engineers
used Dearman to do this
large task like handling photo uploads
after has been uploaded
sharing to Facebook or Twitter
after you upload or even sending
push notifications are put in a queue.
Then over 200 workers
would work at this queue, constantly
filling tasks one by one.
sharing to Facebook,
could be 10 seconds after you upload
and it doesn't really bother you.
So being able to send certain
jobs off to do later is a huge component.
And what makes applications
run as fast as possible.
so when you have 100 instances happening
at the same time doing different things,
how do you even monitor this,
especially if you're three engineers?
Monitoring these systems is one of
the most important things you can do.
So the Instagram team
use immune to see graphs across
all of the things on their system.
This also allowed them to set points
in their graph to send alerts
when things got too high.
And as open source nature
makes it really easy
to add your own plugins
to help with your unique situations
like photos per second signups
per minute, and more.
and tools like Sentry,
which lives inside of your applications,
makes it easy for developers to be able to
track bugs Sentry will send you
the stack trace as well as the bug
before the user even reports that.
and at this point,
this monitoring tools is probably
where these three engineers would find out
what they had to work on next.
So when we look back
at the core principles,
we can see they kept it very simple.
Yeah, I know.
Doing all of this is probably not simple
for one simple task.
In theory, never once would you question
the role of a specific area
in the infrastructure.
And because of that,
I think they kept it very simple.
Don't reinvent the wheel.
something you see
and big tech is software's like this
as only geared towards their company
to suit their specific needs.
Of course this makes sense
when you handle billions of users,
the open source methods
might not 100% accommodate to your needs.
what I love is that all the software
that they use, you can go on
to GitHub and download right now
so that you can take advantage of it.
So in a way
it's almost very inspiring as a developer
with proven and solid technologies
when you can software
that Instagram used have all passed
the test of time.
even the proprietary software is like the
AWB load balancers are still being used.
Engine X Rattus, G Unicorn.
anyone have the answer to that?
By the way, Dearman
and more are still being used.
And even back then, it wasn't necessarily
a risk to use those softwares either.
what I love
about seeing this infrastructure is that
if you map out in the way that we did,
you can almost see at what point
they decided to implement
what software and server, at what point.
when you're a three person team,
you just have to do what you have to do.
This article was posted 12 years ago,
so make sure you check it out in the link
in the description below.
you love to see deep dives of how your
favorite software works behind the scenes,
then make sure you check out
my Discord video on how they scale
to like trillions of messages.
This insane.